Development of electron beam AIMS for high spatial resolution measurement of high-Z material migration


Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy with electron beams is a common and versatile tool used in electron microscopy to determine the composition of a material surface.  EDX is quantitative and highly sensitive to high-Z elements.  Accelerator-based In-situ Materials Surveillance (AIMS) has recently been demonstrated for quantifying low-Z elements using ion beams.

Many aspects of EDX can be combined with the ion beam AIMS technique to develop a new in-situ diagnostic for tokamak plasma facing components (PFC) that would be complementary to ion beam AIMS.

An electron beam AIMS diagnostic would use a high energy electron beam injected into the tokamak to induce X-ray emission.  Si-Li detectors would be used to make spectroscopic X-ray measurements to quantify high-Z materials on PFCs.  The toroidal and vertical field coils would be used for beam steering to provide macroscopic spatial resolution.

Complementary diagnostic for ion beam AIMS:
Ion beams allow for detection of low-Z elements on material surfaces whereas electron beams can provide detection high-Z elements.

Advantages:
1) Highly sensitive to molybdenum and tungsten.
2) X-ray emission cross sections are much larger than gamma and neutron cross sections.
3) With modern detectors, elements with Z > 5 can be detected.
4) High energy electron accelerators are much simpler and less expensive compared to ion accelerators.
5) Much lower magnetic fields are required for electron beams because of their low mass.
6) Electron beams < 5 MeV electron beams can achieve comparable beam penetration depths to ion beam AIMS (~10 micro).
7) Relativistic electron beams are easier to focus and transport than ion beams (space charge effects are less significant and self B-fields confine the beam).

Disadvantages:
1) X-rays have shorter mean free paths in materials than gamma rays and neutrons used for ion beam AIMS.  Line-of-sight between the beam target and the detector is therefore necessary.  Retractable detectors may be necessary to provide sufficient PFC accessibility.

